Transcriber: Theresa Ranft
Reviewer: Mile Živković
Hi! I'm Rick, and...
Wow, this was more difficult
for me than I had expected.
(Sigh)
I'm just going to say it, aren't I?
Hi, I'm Rick, I'm a politician.
(Laughter)
(Applause)
I didn't expect my life
to lead down this path, you know.
It started out with talking politics
in the pub on Friday and Saturday nights.
Then things scaled up,
and we talked a little bit of politics
over coffee at work,
and before you know it you've put multiple
people in the European Parliament
and founded a political movement
that spread to over 50 countries.
(Laughter)
It could happen to any of you, you know.
So, to introduce the Pirate Party,
how many in here have heard of
the Swedish Pirate Party before?
Let's see a show of hands.
Well that's about half to two-thirds,
which is pretty much what we see
across the world, actually.
So I put it in the presentation.
(Laughter)
Just for kicks,
how many in here have heard
of any other Swedish political party?
Let's see a show of hands.
(Laughter)
Yup, same thing as all over the world,
scattered hands here in the audience.
Isn't that funny?
(Laughter)
For those of you who haven't heard
of the Swedish Pirate Party before,
basically, we love the Net,
we love copying and sharing,
and we love civil liberties.
For that, some people call us "pirates."
Rather than being ashamed by this
which I think was their intent,
we decided to stand tall about it,
and as a result of that,
we now have two seats
in the European Parliament,
15 seats in the Berlin Parliament,
we have almost 200 seats
in local councils across Europe,
and we are present in 56 countries,
starting on January 1st, 2006
in Sweden as "Piratpartiet."
So for the next 12 minutes, we're going
to spend four minutes each
on a little bit of: what is the message
of this new movement,
my story on it, and ending
with what we all can learn from there.
The title is "Politics of Protest",
and we hear that a lot.
Like, "You're just a protest
movement, come on!"
Well, like "protest?"
We're not talking about defiance
for defiance's sake here.
(Laughter)
But rather, if you're not in government
and disagreeing with what
the government does,
then, by definition, you're dissenting.
If you want to change the status quo,
you're part of a protest.
There have been many before us, you know.
The "Greens" came 40 years ago,
they protested pollution.
"Labour" came 80 years ago,
they protested exploitation of workers.
And you had "Liberals"
who came 120 years ago,
which protested overbearing power
from royalty and the church.
They all became established
politics and policy making.
All of these waves start out
as a protest against something,
and then solidifying into an ideology.
40 years ago,
the rallying cry of the youth
were peace and love,
usually coupled with smoking
one of the odd exotic plant,
you know, for the correct tone of voice
in saying this on media.
That was later solidified into
a political standpoint of sustainability,
- which has many more syllables -
and therefore can't be pronounced the same
way, but this has stood until now.
When you look at a value
survey of 17-year olds,
environment and sustainability
is no longer on the top of their agenda.
Something else overtook it
just in recent years,
and that is freedoms
of speech and openness.
And here's where
the old guard gets confused.
"Freedom of speech, we introduced that
120 years ago; we already have that!
Why are these people rallying?"
And, honestly, I don't think
they understand that.
This, in its easiest translation,
is "Leave the net alone."
Because when you look
at what the old guard is doing,
they're introducing censorship,
they're introducing wiretapping,
they're introducing an end to anonymity,
and all of this amounts
to cracking down freedom of speech.
If the old politicians understood
that the laws they are making
are the equivalent of putting
microphones under every café table,
I think they would be
absolutely horrified,
but they don't live online,
so they don't understand that.
There's a crackdown going on
of the net all over the world,
only the excuses differ.
If you look at ex-President Mubarak,
it was almost to the day, a year ago,
as he shut down the Internet
to prevent the uprising in Egypt.
[Internet was acting weird
so I tried turning it off and on again]
You can kind of question his sanity,
if he wants people to stay at home indoors
and he's shutting off the Internet,
if he wants people to stay indoors
he should crank it up, for heaven's sake!
But, still.
Only the excuses differ.
Here in the West it's terrorism,
it's battling organized crime,
and it's sometimes battling
pornography in various forms.
In Muslim countries, it's preserving
the sanctity of the prophet.
In some other countries,
it's security of the nation.
But it's always the same action:
censorship, wiretapping,
identifying, and crackdown.
What that tells me is that
if the politicians of today
see the entire growing up
generation as a problem,
then maybe it's the politicians
who are the problem.
(Applause)
Thank you.
What we are demanding
isn't really rocket science.
We're demanding the same rights
that our parents had 40 years ago.
If you sent a letter in the mail,
you and you alone would determine
whether you identified yourself
on the outside of the envelope,
on the inside, just
on the letter, or not at all.
Nobody had the right to open this letter
in transit just to see what you sent.
Translated to the growing up generation,
that means that people are demanding
to send whatever they like on the Net
without being tracked,
wiretapped, and identified.
And I think it's absolutely reasonable
that our children have
the same rights and civil liberties
that our parents had in their environment.
Now the copyright industry,
in particular, objects to this.
As in, "But we can't make
money in that case."
That does not matter.
An entrepreneur is tasked
with making money
given the constraints
of society and technology.
They do not get
to dismantle civil liberties,
even if, and perhaps especially if,
they can't make money otherwise.
That's why you're seeing rallies
for freedom of speech
across Europe and the world.
Here's a map of the anti-ACTA rallies,
and I think it's quite impressive.
So, what's my story?
How do I do this?
Going from an ugly web page
to actually having people in parliament?
There are many people
working on this, obviously,
and the Pirate Party is just one movement
out of many, but this is my story.
In 2005, I found three
things objectionable.
There was the software patent debate
in the European parliament
which would criminalize knowledge.
There was yet another copyright
monopoly harshening in Sweden,
and finally, the Data Retention Directive
being voted in the European Parliament,
which made all our mobile phones
into governmental tracking devices.
I took exception to that,
but realized at the end of the day
that people are people;
these politicians aren't evil,
they're just trying their best
to make a better world.
So instead, you've got to have
a bit of empathy with your adversary,
and understand their position,
and I found that the best way
to effectuate change here
was to threaten to fire them.
So I posted a manifesto.
Short version is that I wrote
two lines in a chat,
and more or less overnight,
it just blew up in my face.
300 activists on the first day,
and that became the original crew.
I realized this was my chance
to change the world for the better.
I had a choice here;
I could either be overwhelmed
by the scale of it,
and retreat back into the gray mass,
or, like I did, I had
a high paying IT job,
I could take a loan
to live off of, quit my job
- in that order, very important -
(Laughter)
and build a Pirate Party.
So I decided to try to change the world.
Elections were coming up
eight months out; elections of 2006.
That was eight months, right?
It was plenty of time.
An engineering project is just over
the weekend, so eight months, come on.
Turns out we got 0.63%
in the first elections,
but there was an important change there.
We had been, "Here is this
year's joker party."
Going from that to,
"Sir, do you have time for an interview
sometime in the next two weeks?"
It was quite a change.
Anyway, my loan ran out, inevitably.
I asked the activists for help.
If you have spare money
and want me to do this full-term,
please give me a little bit of change
at the end of the month.
I lived off begging for 18 months,
and tabloids scandalized me
for it, of course.
But it worked.
So the EU elections came.
We won the world.
Three and a half years
after founding we got 7%, 7.13%,
and two seats in the European elections.
That was the quickest way of getting
into parliament that I found anywhere,
and we became the largest party for people
under 30, with 25% of those votes.
That just sent shockwaves
through the establishment.
And this was then followed by successes
pretty much all over Europe.
We're called the fastest-growing
political movement,
and today I'm instead employed
by the European Parliament;
again scandal, trying to be scandalized
by tabloids over that instead of begging.
So, what do we learn from this?
What can we learn?
There's a Futurama quote,
I like Futurama; I'm a nerd.
"When push comes to shove,
you gotta do what you love -
even when it's not a good idea."
(Laughter)
What kind of idiot thinks
they can change the world
by founding a new political party, really?
This kind of idiot.
There's another good quote.
"If it's stupid
but works, it ain't stupid."
So we learn here that people aren't evil.
Your worst adversaries aren't evil,
and trying to portray them as such
does not help your cause,
but it does something else;
it defines you.
And that's very important, no matter
what cause you're setting out on.
So, whether you believe that you can
or cannot make a difference,
it's a matter of attitude.
And, in both cases, you're probably right.
This is about leadership.
This is about saying, "I'm going to change
the world, who's with me?"
And choose a reasonable approach.
Don't shoot for the moon,
that's just silly.
That's been done already.
Shoot for Mars.
End illiteracy, help two billion
people learn to read.
You can do this.
Everyone in this room has some cause
they would love to make a difference in.
You can do it.
Don't dare let anybody tell you otherwise.
You've got to be credible, inclusive,
and tangible when communicating this.
As long as you do that,
it's just a matter of telling people,
"I believe; I know we can do this.
We can write ourselves
into the history books by going to Mars."
Going home, it's a matter of setting
a couple of bullet points:
recruit one dozen
volunteer rocket scientists,
two dozen mechanical engineers,
and someone who's willing to mix
rocket fuel in their backyard.
Some of you are laughing.
This is how you do it.
People will take your vision
and do whatever they can to further it,
you just have to let them.
So, as a final note:
change doesn't just happen,
somebody makes it happen.
And you, everyone in this room,
can be that person.
And that's my presentation.
Please tweet any feedback you have,
I love to see my name on Twitter.
(Laughter)
(Applause)